# Incident: YYYY-MM-DD HH-mm-ss

## Summary

Between the hours of 17:00 and 18:00 UTC on 04/07/2025, JWT Pizza orders began failing for all customers. This was the result of the pizza factory failing to create orders. This was a critical bug that completely shut down JWT Pizza. The bug lasted for approximately 30 minutes before resolution. These failures were detected by alerts within Grafana, JWT Pizza’s observability provider. Upon receiving alerts, the JWT Pizza team investigated and resolved the issue by 18:00 UTC. 

## Detection

At 17:30 UTC, an alert threshold for failed pizza orders was broken, resulting in alerts being sent through the defined escalation chain of JWT Pizza. Tyler Trommlitz was paged with a standard notification. Five minutes later, he received an urgent notification from Grafana which he then acknowledged and began working on resolution. Time to detection will be improved by sending urgent notifications first instead of standard notifications, which should cut down on time to acknowledgement. 

## Impact

For 30 minutes between 17:30 UTC and 18:00 UTC on 04/07/2025, all users were unable to place orders at JWT Pizza. When customers attempted to order a pizza, they were met with the error message “Failed to fulfill order at factory”. Thankfully, JWT Pizza’s alerts caught this and the issue was resolved quickly before any support tickets were raised by customers. 

## Timeline

All times are in UTC.
-	17:30 - Orders on JWT Pizza began to fail completely. 
-	17:32 - Alert for pizza creation failure was raised by Grafana and sent through the escalation chain.
-	17:33 - Standard notification sent to Tyler Trommlitz.
-	17:38 - Urgent notification sent to Tyler Trommlitz. 
-	17:38 - Notification acknowledged by Tyler Trommlitz and investigation began.
-	17:45 - Logs were investigated, revealing errors when placing orders for pizza. 
-	17:50 – Response body was investigated, revealing a reportPizzaCreationErrorToPizzaFactoryUrl field. 
-	17:55 – Tyler Trommlitz made a GET request to this URL, notifying the pizza factory of the error. 
-	18:00 – Pizza factory fixed the error and orders began to succeed. 


## Response

Tyler Trommlitz acknowledged the incident at 17:38 UTC and resolved the issue at 18:00 UTC. He resolved this by reporting the error to the pizza factory that orders were failing to be created. The pizza factory then fixed the issue. The main delay in resolution was that it took 2 notifications to be sent to Tyler Trommlitz before acknowledgement. 

## Root cause

The root cause was a failure by the pizza factory to create orders. This was a result of chaos testing being completed by JWT Pizza. Once the error was reported to the pizza factory, the chaos was resolved and the pizza factory began to successfully create pizzas again. 

## Resolution

The on-call engineer investigated the chaos and discovered a URL to report the errors to the pizza factory. By making a GET request to this URL, which had an API key and a fix code as query parameters, the on-call engineer successfully reported the errors to pizza factory, which then resolved the issues. 

## Prevention

Investigation has also revealed the possibility for significant latency when creating orders at the pizza factory. If this occurs, there is a reportSlowPizzaToFactoryUrl field in the response body of order creation to resolve this issue. Because this issue arose as a result of chaos testing, it is not expected that this will occur again. 

## Action items

The main action item is to change alerting strategy to send urgent notifications first instead of sending a standard notification, waiting 5 minutes, then sending an urgent notification. This will result in quicker response times and resolution. 